<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css"/>
        <link href="https://fonts.googleapis.com/css?family=Assistant" rel="stylesheet"/>
        <title>Digital Humanities</title>
    </head>
    <body>
        <nav>
            <a href="index.xhtml">Home</a>
            <a href="syllabus.xhtml">Syllabus</a>
            <a href="description.xhtml">Policies</a>
            <a href="projects.xhtml">Projects</a>
            <!-- <a href="assignments.xhtml">Assignments</a> -->
            <a href="http://dh.obdurodon.org/">Resources</a>
            <a href="https://bactriana.org">Bactriana</a>
        </nav>
        <h1>Computational Methods in the Humanities</h1>

        

        <h2>Projects</h2>
        
        <h3>Fall 2024</h3>
        <ul>
            <li><a href="https://zelliewinterich.github.io/CMH/c_homepage.xhtml">Constitutional Thinkers</a></li>
            <li><a href="https://bradle777.github.io/shakespeare/">Representation in Shakespeare: Language and Appearances</a></li>
        </ul>
        
        <h3>Spring 2024</h3>
        <ul>
            <li><a href="https://taishanahan.github.io/Former-Soviet/">Constitutions of the Former Soviet Union</a></li>
            <li><a href="https://c-arthur-mcs.github.io/Sevdah/index.html">Sevdah</a>: An etymological study of Bosnian song and poetry</li>
            <li><a href="https://reneedubaich.github.io/folklore/index.xhtml">Women in Folklore</a></li>
        </ul>
        
        <h3>Projects from Past Semesters</h3>
        <ul>
            <li><a href="http://dh.obdurodon.org/course-projects.xhtml">Projects Hosted on Obdurodon (Pitt Oakland)</a></li>
            <li><a href="https://newtfire.org/courses/studentProjects.html">Projects Hosted on Newtfire</a></li>
        </ul>
        
     
        <h2>Project Guildelines</h2>


        <p>Early in the semester groups of students will identify, though consultation with
            the instructors, a <em>public domain</em> text (that is, without copyright
            restrictions) in the humanities that interests them and a set of related
            research questions, and will work with that text throughout the semester,
            performing document analysis, developing and implementing a formal structural
            model, encoding (marking up) the text according to that model, developing
            programs to perform research with that text, and constructing a web site to
            publish their research. Each project team will meet weekly for approximately one
            hour with a project mentor (one of the instructors) outside class for project
            planning and discussion. <a href="project-timeline.xhtml">This chart</a> provides a rough idea of weekly progress over the course of the semester.</p>
        <p>We will manage course projects in an online professional development environment
            called GitHub, and we’ll explain how it works and what the relevant terms
                (<dfn>repo</dfn>, <dfn>issue</dfn>, <dfn>project</dfn>, etc.) mean in class,
            so if you’re reading this at the beginning of the semester, don’t worry about
            the jargon or the technical details.</p>
        <p>Once project teams have been formed, each team will
            post a <em><a href="standing-assignments.xhtml">weekly project update</a></em>, in the form of an Issue on the designated TopHat discussion forum, due each Friday. (These weekly postings are per team, not per student, though every team member should be responsible for writing and posting at least once throughout the semester.) These postings should be status reports about
            your projects and should address four topics: 1) what you accomplished in the
            preceding week, 2) what you learned, 3) where you got stuck (and how you plan to
            get unstuck), and 4) what you plan to accomplish in the upcoming week. Reports
            are typically brief, but they should address both the state of the project in
            general and the specific weekly contributions of each of the individual team
            members. The instructors will show you how to use the Projects and Issues tabs
            in your GitHub repos (which is what we do in our own research) to manage tasks,
            timeliness, and any impediments you might face. Weekly project update postings
            should refer (with links) to specific new or revised content on the repo.</p>
        <p>Unlike with projects in many other courses, the project evaluation is based not
            only on the final product, but also on regular, steady progress on individual
            project related tasks, and your instructors will work with you to identify
            appropriate weekly goals for your project using Github Projects. Weekly progress
            will be graded on the following scale: <q>exceeds target</q> (A+), <q>meets
                target</q> (A), <q>some progress</q> (B), <q>minimal progress</q> (C), <q>no
                progress</q> (F); the lowest two Project Progress grades will be excluded
            from the course grade. Because the primary purpose of the project is for
            students to learn how to use the Digital Humanities tools and methods employed
            by professionals, the instructors will work with you during your weekly project
            meetings to help you learn to apply the necessary methods to your own research,
            and obtaining your results according to those methods is part of the evaluation
            of the project. If your team determines your research needs a technology or
            method not taught in depth in the course, please speak with an instructor, who
            will help you figure out how to incorporate it. All project components (weekly
            progress = 30%, midterm task = 10%, final result = 20%), taken together, are
            worth 60% of the course grade.</p>


    </body>
</html>
